In this section we'll talk about a couple of security concepts in WordPress.
So we've talked about security before and we already know about sanitization and validation and escaping.
So in this section we'll shed some light on user roles and capabilities and also on nonces.
So let's make sure you have your MAMP server open. And I'm gonna change to my theme and run "npm start".
And let's go to wp-admin and login.
So when you create a new user in WordPress, so go to Users and Add New.
You have a field called Role here. And it could be a Subscriber or an Admin or Author and stuff like
that.
So the user we are currently logged in with is an Administrator. So let's create a new user and let's call it "test".
And let's make this user a Subscriber.
So you now have a subscriber user and we'll use this user later.
But let's now take a look at this article here which is about roles and capabilities in WorkPress. So roles
are as we mentioned are admins and editors and authors and stuff like that.
And each one of these roles we have some capabilities. And capabilities are some permissions or stuff
that you can do as a user in WordPress.
So we have here a really good table which lists all the capabilities in the rows and in the columns we have
the roles or the user types.
So we have Super Admin or Admin or Editor and stuff like that.
And then in the table cells you can check if that user type have this capability or this permission.
So for example activate_plugins and a Super Admin and an Admin can activate plugins.
But all the other user types cannot.
And the Super Admin by the way is only different than an Admin
if you have a multi-site WordPress installation. And we don't have that to Super Admin is an Admin in
our case.
So in order to check if the currently logged in user has a certain capability WordPress provides
this function, current_user_can(). And it takes the capability as a string and it returns a boolean
whether this currently logged in user can do this permission or not.
There is also another function, user_can() without "current".
And this is if you want to check if another user other than the currently logged in one can do something.
But most of the time we'll use the currently logged in user.
So these are roles and capabilities in a nutshell. Let's now create a feature that will let us further
understand the roles and capabilities. So let's go to the our website. And in our blog
let's create a button for each blog post somewhere here.
And this button will delete these posts but only if the currently logged in user is allowed to delete
posts.
So how will we do that?
We will create a link. And this link will go to some URL and will send some requests to the server.
And then we'll handle this request in order to delete the post.
So what we saw the link will be, let's open new tag here. It will be our home URL and then some query arguments
here. So we'll have an action. It should be delete for example. And post and it will be the ID of the post.
And then we will need to handle this request and get the post with this ID and delete it. So before handling
lets first create this link.
So I'm gonna go to functions.php and create a new function. Let's actually edit in the helpers file.
So "function" and prefixed, "_themename_" let's call it "delete_post()"
So this function will return some URL, right? Let's create this URL now. So I think,
right. I'm gonna get the home URL using this function. And then append to it our query arguments. So "?action"
and so on.
But actually WordPress provides a better way to do that much cleaner
is called, function called add_query_args or add_query_arg(). And it takes two arguments the array
arguments we need to add to the URL and the URL that we need to add these arguments to.
So in our case it's home URL.
And the array will be.
We'll have the "action" and let's prefix the action as well
in order not to interfere with any other actions.
Let's call it  "_themename_delete_post" and we need to get the "post".
Ao we can make this function accept the post ID as an argument or we can directly use get_the_ID() because
we will use this function inside of the loop.
So get_the_ID() will get the ID of the current post in the loop.
So we will return an A tag with this URL as the "href". So
let's use ' here and our URL.
And then let's close it.
And then let's add the delete text which should be escaped and translated of course.
So "Delete Post" and the text domain which is "_themename".
And we are missing the.
I think this should be fine. So let's use this function inside of our post which was I think we created a
template part for it.
Yes in content. Let's add it after the Read More link.
It's not important how it looks.
Now we just need to know how to do the functionality.
So we'll echo the output of this function. And let's see now. And we have the post link.
And if you look at the bottom left you'll see where this link will take us.
So if you click one of these now it will take us to this link.
Nothing will happen of course it won't be deleted. Because now we need to handle this request.
We need to check if we have this action and the post and then delete this post.
If the user has this capability. So let's do that in the next lecture.